The Project Gutenberg eBook of How to Trace a Pedigree, by H. A.
Crofton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: How to Trace a Pedigree

Author: H. A. Crofton

Release Date: March 9, 2022 [eBook #67600]

Language: English

Produced by: The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO TRACE A PEDIGREE ***





 UNIFORM WITH THIS VOLUME.

 _FOR THE BIBLIOPHILE AND BOOK-LOVER._

 Each Volume bound in Library Style. Cloth gilt, =2=/- net.

 _BY JAMES DOUGLAS STEWART._


 How to Use a Library.

 With Explanations of Library Catalogues, a Systematic Description of
 Guides to Books, and a Guide to Special Libraries.


 RE-ISSUED FROM “THE BOOK-LOVER’S LIBRARY.”

 _BY HENRY B. WHEATLEY._


 How to Catalogue a Library.

 Contains various points and rules for making a Library Catalogue, and
 discusses the principles involved, etc.


 How to Form a Library.

 Full of helpful and practical suggestions for the Bibliographer and
 much that will both amuse and interest the book-loving reader.


 How to Make an Index.

 The various theories concerning Indexing are set forth, certain rules
 are laid down and illustrated, whilst erroneous methods are exposed in
 this volume.


 _BY W. CAREW HAZLITT._


 Gleanings in Old Garden Literature.

 “A volume that may afford delight to a lover of gardens, even if he be
 not a lover of books.”--_Morning Post._


 Old Cookery Books & Ancient Cuisine.

 An historical sketch of the subject of cookery as supplied by the
 earliest MSS. and Printed Cookery Books of this and other countries.


 Studies in Jocular Literature.

 A POPULAR SUBJECT MORE CLOSELY CONSIDERED.


  LONDON: ELLIOT STOCK,
  62, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C.

 [Illustration: Publisher mark]




 _A KEY TO THE FAMILY DEED-CHEST._

 How to Decipher and Study Old Documents

 Third Edition, Revised. Enlarged and Illustrated.

 By E. E. THOYTS. Art cloth, =5/-= net.


 Some of the difficulties which beset any one who studies such
 documents for the first time, unless he be an expert, are the
 deciphering of the ancient and unfamiliar style of writing; the
 peculiar abbreviations and signs which were used by our forefathers;
 the quaint phrases and expressions and obsolete words occurring; the
 arbitrary and old-fashioned spelling, which to the uninitiated are
 always vexatious. It is to enable the more or less experienced student
 to meet and cope with these and similar difficulties that this work
 has been compiled, by one who has had considerable experience in
 research.


  LONDON: ELLIOT STOCK,
  62, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C.




 FOR THE GENEALOGIST.

 _BY WILLIAM H. WHITMORE, A.M._


 ANCESTRAL TABLETS.

 A Collection of Diagrams for Pedigrees so arranged that Eight
 Generations of the Ancestors of any Person may be Recorded in a
 connected and Simple Form.

 Royal 4to, Quarter Roxburgh, gilt, =8/6= post free.

 “A difficult plan to explain on paper, but is fascinatingly simple
 when actually handled, as an American critic truly remarks--‘No one
 with the least bent for genealogical research ever examined this
 ingeniously compact substitute for the family tie without longing to
 own it.’”--_Reliquary._


  LONDON: ELLIOT STOCK,
  62, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C.




  HOW TO
  TRACE A PEDIGREE


  BY
  H. A. CROFTON


  LONDON: ELLIOT STOCK
  62, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C.
  1911




PREFACE


I have endeavoured in this little book to give the amateur
pedigree-hunter the benefit of what I have personally found to be the
most valuable documents to search, and full instructions as to where
he can consult them, also the various steps to be taken in tracing a
pedigree, without unduly crowding his attention with names and classes
of documents which he may need to consult.

I have, however, added most of these in a later part of the book, so
that sufficient information should be obtainable within its pages to
meet the requirements of the average genealogical searcher in the
British Isles.

  H. A. C.




  CONTENTS


  CHAP.                                                             PAGE

  INTRODUCTORY                                                         1

  I. FIRST STEPS IN PEDIGREE-HUNTING                                   3

  II. WILL-SEARCHING                                                   8

  III. PUBLISHED SOURCES OF INFORMATION                               13

  IV. MISCELLANEOUS MS. DOCUMENTS OF VALUE TO THE SEARCHER            19

  V. HOW TO MAKE A FAMILY TREE                                        24

  VI. ADDITIONAL NOTES ON PEDIGREE-HUNTING IN LONDON                  27

  VII. THE PEDIGREE-HUNTER IN IRELAND                                 33

  VIII. THE PEDIGREE-HUNTER IN SCOTLAND AND THE PROVINCES             38

  IX. THE WILL-SEARCHER IN ENGLAND                                    45

  X. AN ADDITIONAL LIST OF PUBLICATIONS WHICH MAY BE USEFUL WHEN
  TRACING A PEDIGREE                                                  48

  XI. THE PAINS AND PLEASURES OF PEDIGREE-HUNTING                     52

  XII. HOW TO SAVE EXPENSE IN PEDIGREE-HUNTING                        56

  XIII. LAST WORDS                                                    59

  INDEX                                                               65




HOW TO TRACE A PEDIGREE




INTRODUCTORY


Various authorities have derived the word “pedigree” very differently,
and it is impossible to say anything definite as to its origin. One
of the most picturesque and possibly the most probable derivation is
from _pied de grue_--crane’s foot. Evidently this was intended as a
word-picture, the claws dividing from a bird’s foot being suggestive of
the different branches issuing from the parent stem in a pedigree. When
speaking of stems and branches, our thoughts are naturally directed to
trees--hence, of course, the expression a “family tree.”

Many nations have preserved the records of family genealogy in their
national archives; indeed, all have done this more or less, and all
honour to those who have been keenest in the matter, for a nation is
composed of families, and family or individual history or biography
helps to make the history of that nation, while heredity perhaps more
than environment tends to explain the complex character with which each
individual member of it is endowed.

The study of genealogy, therefore, is a useful one; but, apart from
such considerations, there are many who are personally interested in
their own ancestry, and would like to be able to trace pedigrees and
learn more of their family history; but the probability is that they
have not the slightest idea how to set about the work. Others may think
(however interested they might be in _results_) that the details they
would have to master must be necessarily dry as dust, and that the
search itself would run away with a great deal of money.

Well, though it is quite possible to expend large sums in
pedigree-hunting, it is by no means necessary to do so; and, though
some dry records may have to be plodded through, searches are in
general replete with interest. The reader may possibly be reassured on
both these points before laying down this little book, the especial aim
of which will be to show the amateur how he may become a successful
pedigree-hunter.




CHAPTER I

FIRST STEPS IN PEDIGREE-HUNTING


The reader being anxious to trace his own or a friend’s pedigree, or to
look for some missing link in an ancestry--how should he set about the
work?

To do this more efficiently, and to save unnecessary expense, he
should first ascertain and set down whatever _is already known_ on the
subject or can be discovered, before proceeding to record-searching.

We will suppose that he is interested in ascertaining the ancestry
of a certain man, whose father’s name is known and, perhaps, his
grandfather’s; but he cannot trace the pedigree farther back.

Also, presumably, he may know where this individual and, possibly, his
father and grandfather lived. From such data, however slight they may
be, his future knowledge is to spring--for he must work from the known
to the unknown. This is necessary in all genealogical searches.

Friends of the family can give him some little particulars--all of
which should be carefully noted down--and a visit to the place where he
locates the earliest known member of it, if practicable, might be very
advantageous.

If this is not possible at the moment, he should write to the vicar of
the parish, who, from the parochial entries, would supply information
at a moderate cost. There might also be tombstones, with names and
dates on them, which would help materially.

Some parish registers have been printed. The searcher should ascertain
whether the parish in which he is interested is among the number, and,
if so, whether the published entries have been brought down to the date
he requires, as in that event he might obtain the necessary information
in some large library free of cost. But he is scarcely likely to be so
exceptionally fortunate at the start, so will probably have to make the
requisite inquiries.

Before doing so, however, our pedigree-hunter should carefully consider
the _surname_ of the individual in question. If he boasts of an
uncommon one, as say, for instance, _Vandeleur_, the chances are that
all the Vandeleurs mentioned in the same parish books will belong to
his family. If, however, he is a _Smith_--well, the Smiths are not a
very small tribe, and several of the name unrelated to each other
might appear in the same parish. To obviate the difficulties which this
would entail, our pedigree-hunter should be clear as to the district in
the parish or name of the house in which his ancestor lived. But, if he
does not know this, how is he to ascertain it?

Well, he probably _will_ know it in the case of the latest of his
ancestors, say, his father or grandfather, and let him work from that
point. Failing this, a study of the family names in each district
should reveal the secret.

The _surname_ itself, especially if the searcher has been able to trace
the ancestry some way back, should be carefully noted with regard to
the different forms in which it may appear, for in early days there was
a quite delightful variation in the spelling of names; so a somewhat
similar sounding name, if spelt differently, should not be ruled out of
court as having necessarily nothing to do with the matter, the _odds_
being generally on the other side.

Even if parochial registers supply no additional details to those
which friends have been able to give, their testimony may be of great
importance, for the recollections of old friends are more or less
traditional, and the golden rule to be most carefully observed by
genealogists, is

  _Verify your Information._

An honest searcher would never appreciate a “faked” pedigree; but it
is fatally easy to assume a certain point, and, working from that
assumption, to have all future details more or less incorrect.

No time should be considered wasted which is spent on verifying
information.

The searchers should not even take it for granted that all Peerages or
similar works are always correct; as a matter of fact, this is far from
being the case.

Even in the mystic circle of the Baronetage it is said that some
sixty claimants have appeared, whose titles, though received for long
unchallenged, cannot be fully verified.

Our late king recently ordered an _official_ roll of the Baronetage to
be registered and kept.

This does not preclude, however, the pedigree-hunter from consulting
Peerages and works of Family History at libraries; indeed, this might
well be the next stage in his search. Let him look through his Library
Index, under the heading “Genealogy,” and consult works in it which he
thinks might bear on the matter in hand.

There are many such in all good libraries, a list of which will be
given later on; but, while the search is in its infancy and does not go
farther back than two or three generations, probably the Peerages (if
the family is of social position), with perhaps certain other printed
pedigrees and works on family history, such as Burke’s _Commoners_ and
_Landed Gentry_, should suffice for the present.

But the golden rule in genealogy should always be remembered; and,
though the information thus derived may possibly be fairly correct,
many details may call for verification later in the search.




CHAPTER II

WILL-SEARCHING


Having proceeded thus far, the great subject of Wills, which form one
of the strongest features in pedigree-hunting, should be now approached.

The searcher will presumably now have new ancestors to note; so, before
he starts will-hunting, he should have some idea as to how to record
them on a family “tree.”

And, as a help towards this, he cannot do better than provide himself
with a work by William Whitmore, entitled _Ancestral Tablets_.[1]
These are a collection of Diagrams and Pedigrees, so arranged that
eight generations of ancestors can be recorded in a manner which is
plain, simple, and easily understood. It is difficult to explain this
ingenious system on paper, but a glance at it is almost sufficient to
show its method of working.

The merest tyros in genealogy, or those more advanced in the study,
will find these tablets invaluable, as they do away with the difficulty
of having to draw up a family tree for themselves.

But, whatever kind of “tree” is adopted or worked out, the study of
wills should be productive of new ancestors with which to embellish it.

If working in London, Somerset House will be the happy hunting-ground
of the will-searcher, and in various parts of England there are
District Registries at which old wills are also kept.

Perhaps, in a sense, the searcher in Ireland has most need of all to
be grateful to the powers that be with regard to this aspect of his
pedigree work, for, practically speaking, all Irish wills can be found
in Dublin. The later ones are in the Probate Office, and the earlier,
with which searchers will be mainly interested, in the Dublin Record
Office, both these offices being situated in the “Four Courts.”

But, wherever he is working, the wills will naturally divide themselves
into those proved in the Prerogative and Diocesan Courts.

In England, up to 1858, wills were proved in the Prerogative Courts
of Canterbury and York, or were to be found in the various Diocesan
Courts. There were also a large number (nearly four hundred) of
“peculiar courts,” which were depositories of such documents. Later
wills are all kept at Somerset House, and a great number of earlier
ones, in ponderously bound volumes of copies, can also be consulted
there.

Suitable indexes are everywhere provided, and the searcher should study
the contents of these, under the name for which he is looking.

Let us suppose he has traced the ancestry of a family of the name of
Grey down to a certain Thomas Grey of Larchfield, Blankshire, who died
in 1790.

His next step is to find Thomas Grey’s father, and afterwards he will
trace his line farther back.

To do this, he will look through any Prerogative or Diocesan Indexes
connected with Blankshire, and then go through all wills of Greys of
Larchfield before 1790; and, if he is not acquainted with the names
of Thomas’ brothers and sisters (which might probably be needed to
fully identify Thomas himself), and he has not full details of his
later family history, he will also consult those of succeeding dates.
In fact, under any circumstances, he should certainly, at one time or
another, look through every will connected with the family in that
district.

If he discovers wills of Greys of Larchfield of the required date, one
of them will probably reveal Thomas’ parentage. Should he not find
such wills, or should they not reveal what he is looking for, he might
search for other wills of the name in the County of Blankshire, and
afterwards for wills in other countries, for in pedigree-hunting no
will which is possibly connected with the family should be ignored.

When all such wills proved in the Prerogative and Diocesan Courts
have been looked up, some degree of new information--probably a large
amount--will almost certainly have been acquired by the expenditure of
more or less time and trouble, as the case may be.

Here again, if the family name is an uncommon one, it would probably
take less time to trace the ancestry than if the name was Jones or
Smith, and here again the variations in the old spelling should be
remembered.

Also, it must not be forgotten that an individual sometimes adopts an
_entirely different surname_. This may not very frequently occur, but
the possible contingency should not be ignored.

An old Statute, 4 Edward IV., enacted that all Irishmen who lived
within the English pale (Dublin, Kildare, etc.) should adopt an English
surname, to be derived from the name of an office, trade, place, or
colour.

It may also be noted that a very uncommon _Christian_ name is often a
great help to the searcher, as, if he comes across this uncommon name
in connection with the required surname, the chances are that he is
on the right track, and has discovered a new twig emanating from the
family tree.

Having searched through wills of the required surname (unless he has
been most singularly unfortunate), the pedigree-hunter, besides having
discovered new ancestors, will have come across many relations of the
family bearing other surnames. The wills of the most likely of these
should be consulted in the same way, as they may reveal much.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Published by Elliot Stock, 62 Paternoster Row, E.C.




CHAPTER III

PUBLISHED SOURCES OF INFORMATION


Having thus gone through what seem to be the most probable wills for
his purpose, the pedigree-hunter may profitably wend his way to a large
library, and consult printed authorities before he studies others in
manuscript.

There is no royal law about this, however; much will depend on where
he lives and what he is looking for, and, possibly, he may elect to go
daily from manuscripts to printed collections, and _vice versa_. But
this chapter will be devoted to information as to the probably most
useful printed books to consult.

There are many others which might also prove valuable, and a detailed
list of these will be found further on.

Assuming that the searcher, as suggested, has in the early part of his
quest looked up Peerages, books of Family History, etc., he may now
proceed to other volumes; but the Family Histories and Peerages should
always be accessible, for he will often need to refer to them again as
new names crop up.

Perhaps he might first consult Marshall’s _Genealogists’ Guide_, which
will give him directions (under the names of different families) where
he can obtain information about such.

Indeed, the number of printed books which _might_ help form no mean
array. To name some of the most valuable of these:--

The _Reports of the Deputy-Keeper_ are issued periodically, and may
prove a great assistance to the searcher. He should consult any volumes
which look promising, and he can judge of this from the indexes
connected with them.

The Deputy-Keeper of the Rolls in Ireland also issues _Reports_, the
information in which may be invaluable when Irish families are the
objects of a search.

Then, if looking “far back into other years,” at least, into somewhat
distant centuries, there are the _Calendars of State Papers_, with
their different series, which may reveal a good deal and are most
interesting reading on certain points. All have good indexes, by means
of which the name required can readily be traced.

The printed volumes of _The Historical Manuscripts’ Commission_ are
mines of information as regards many subjects; but, of course, every
one cannot expect his ancestor to be mentioned there.

Foster’s _Collectanea_--“An index to the pedigrees in the _Herald’s
Visitation_ and other MSS.,” these “other” also being most valuable--is
an important and yet disappointing book.

If the required name happens to begin with an A, Foster may prove a
veritable treasure-trove of information; but if the initial of the
patronymic comes much farther on in the alphabet--alas! Foster is of no
use; for his information, compiled in the most learned manner from a
variety of MSS. and other sources, was to be given alphabetically under
every different surname, but this proved to be a colossal task--too
colossal probably. At any rate, the work has stopped short in the
middle of the B’s.

Sims’ _Index to the Pedigrees_ in the _Herald’s Visitations in the
British Museum_ is not an up-to-date publication, yet is most valuable
if the pedigree-hunter is searching in the Museum.

_Lancashire and Cheshire Records_, by Walford D. Selby, may be
profitably consulted even by those whose ancestors are not connected
with these counties, for the information it affords is by no means
confined to them.

The valuable works of Sir Bernard Burke, all full of family lore, may
reveal much, besides what is to be learned from his _Peerage_ and
_Landed Gentry_. His _Commoners_ especially is of much interest.

Walford’s _County Families_ would prove useful in many cases, and, if
an _Irish_ family is being looked up, O’Hart’s _Irish Pedigrees_ is
a mine of information. But just a word of warning here--some of this
information certainly needs to be verified from other sources before it
can be accepted in its entirety.

If still considering Irish families, Pre’s _Occurrences_ will give
eighteenth-century items of interest, but is more of the character of a
newspaper.

The _Harleian Society Publications_, as well as those of the _Record_
and _Camden Societies_, may prove of importance, especially if somewhat
far back information is desired, while for details connected with the
Elizabethan Age, the _Cecil Papers_ are invaluable. They are also most
interesting reading.

The _Miscellanea Genealogica et Heraldica_, a ponderous and important
work, contains many copies of parish registers and monumental
inscriptions.

The _Index Society’s Publications_ should not be overlooked, nor
those of the _Society of Antiquaries_, the _Royal Archæological
Institute_, and _British Archæological Association_.

The _Pipe Roll Publications_ may prove of value, and, if the family is
of French extraction, the works of the _Huguenot Society_ should be
consulted.

The _Historical Register_, published from 1714 to 1738, may supply
details between those dates, while _The Annual Register_, which began
in 1758 and is still proceeding, should certainly be referred to
for the period required. It is especially useful on account of the
announcements of births, marriages, and deaths which are inserted
regularly.

_Directories_, which have appeared sometimes under different titles for
more than two centuries, may prove of assistance in tracing names and
addresses, especially if the searcher knows the most probable districts
in which to look. The first London Directory was printed in 1677.

_Newspapers_ might also be searched, for they may supply just the
required link. The British Museum possesses a great number of old
newspapers; but if the pedigree-hunter is not searching in London, he
may also find in other libraries a fair supply to meet his demand. The
Dublin National Library, for instance, possesses a good store of early
newspapers.

A novice might scarcely think of consulting _magazines_ with the view
of obtaining genealogical information, and he certainly would not be
likely to find what he requires in our popular monthlies; but from
certain journals of an earlier date a rich harvest might be reaped.

_The Gentleman’s Magazine_ was started in 1731, and, though it
was discontinued in its earlier form, for some years up to the
last half-century, it will prove a happy hunting-ground for the
genealogical student, especially on account of its “obituary” and other
announcements.

An index to the greater number of its volumes has been published
separately, reference being given in it to the volumes supplying the
required information under each name.

_The London Magazine_ was published from 1732 to 1786, and might be
looked up if information is required between these dates.

There are, besides these, certain magazines which are devoted wholly
or in a great part to genealogical matters, such as _The Genealogist_,
_The Ancestor_, which ran for some years, and _Notes and Queries_.
These might well be looked up on the chance of their giving information
about the object of the search.

_The Hibernian Magazine_, an eighteenth-century journal, is especially
valuable in the case of Irish families. The announcements of births,
deaths, and marriages have been printed separately in two volumes, so
_they_ are what should be consulted.




CHAPTER IV

MISCELLANEOUS MS. DOCUMENTS OF VALUE TO THE SEARCHER


We have already considered the subject of Wills and Parish Registers.
Besides these, there is a multitude of miscellaneous manuscripts from
which genealogical information can be gleaned; but what they are will,
in a certain degree, depend on where the pedigree-hunter is searching.

If in London, the treasures of the Record Office are at his disposal,
which MS. treasures claim a later notice to themselves. The Dublin
Record Office, in a lesser degree, will supply many somewhat similar
documents, while in Edinburgh he also can effect much.

So, in whichever of the British Isles he is located, certain MSS. are
at his disposal. To enumerate the most important of these:--

Records of _legal matters_ often throw light on a dark subject. For
these, _Chancery Bills_, their _Answers_ and _Exchequer Degrees_,
should principally be searched. Indexes to such Bills must first be
consulted, then the manuscripts themselves. This will be rather a long
task, as such documents are very numerous and often lengthy, but the
result can scarcely fail to be beneficial.

_Assize Rolls_, which give particulars of cases tried before
itinerating judges, may also reveal a good deal.

_Deeds_ of various kinds, leases, etc., open up a wide field for the
searcher; in fact, more leisure time than is, as a general rule, at
most people’s disposal might profitably be employed on the Deeds alone.

Wills having been hunted up previously, it must not be inferred that,
when a man has died intestate, nothing further can be discovered about
his property or heirs.

In such cases, where personal estate is concerned, an administrator or
administratrix would be appointed, probably his widow or next-of-kin.

In the _Administration Bond_, to which the searcher should direct his
attention, it is very possible that the names of the children of the
deceased may be found; if not, the mere name of the administrator may
reveal a good deal. Indexes are, of course, procurable to all these and
similar documents.

_Marriage Licences_ and _Marriage Licence Bonds_ are often profitable
sources of information.

For nineteenth-century searches, _Census Returns_ may be consulted, and
_Hearth Money Rolls_ (referring to small taxes levied on individuals)
for those of earlier date--from 14 Charles II. to 1 William and Mary.

These, or similar documents, can be found in whichever of the British
Isles the pedigree-hunter is searching; but others, which may possibly
also serve his purpose, can only (unless where copies exist) be
consulted in definite centres.

_Heraldic Records_, which comprise armorial information, important
pedigrees, funeral certificates, etc., are preserved in the College of
Arms, Queen Victoria Street, London, and there is a similar College of
Arms, presided over by the Ulster King of Arms, in Dublin Castle.

A most valuable library is connected with the College of Arms in
London, and, of course, the documents stored in the office itself are
of inestimable value.

All searches must be paid for, however; there are stated fees and
certain rules which cannot be infringed.

_Monastic Bodies_ have often preserved intact their most valuable
records, and where such might prove useful, they will, in many cases,
be found accessible. These registers principally consist of Chronicles,
Registers, and Martyrologies. The two former would be found the most
generally useful, though, naturally, they presuppose that a somewhat
early date is required.

The records of _Freemen_ and of _Municipal Bodies_ may, on occasions,
prove of value; nor should those connected with _Grammar_ and _Public
Schools_ be overlooked.

The Registers of the various Diocesan Courts will supply information
about the _Clergy_, and the dates of their appointment to their
benefices will be found in a series of _Institution Books_, which can
be consulted in the Public Record Office.

For members of the _Medical Profession_ the records of their respective
universities will supply information, and there is a printed work, the
_Roll of the College of Physicians_, by Dr. George Munk, the Registrar
of that College, which gives additional biographical details.

Lists of members of the _Royal College of Surgeons_ and of _Dental
Practitioners_ can also be consulted.

Records connected with _Barristers_ and the Bar are preserved in
Lincoln’s Inn, the Middle and Inner Temple, and Gray’s Inn.

For _Attorneys_ and _Solicitors_ reference should be made to the
_Rolls_ and _Catalogues of Attorneys_, also the _Admission Books_
giving dates, names, and residences; the latter extend from 1729 to
1848. These documents can be looked up in the Record Office.

Here, also, the papers formerly preserved in the War Office are now
kept. This series, which is valuable if particulars connected with the
Army are required, dates from 1700, but its Muster Rolls only from 1760.

There are army lists and muster rolls to be found in other places also.
Sims (who has been referred to previously) enumerates these records,
and mentions where they are now kept.

Several old _Navy Lists_ can be found in the British Museum, and the
Navy Office keeps registers of the officers and men, with date and
place of their deaths. The ages of the men are also entered.

_Universities_, though their lists of graduates are published, have
treasures of information only obtainable at first hand. So, where one
or more of these is likely to prove valuable, their records should, if
possible, be searched. These are principally the _Books of Admission_
to the different colleges, the university, _Matriculation Books_, and
the _Degree Books_.

These give details of parentage and many other items.




CHAPTER V

HOW TO MAKE A FAMILY TREE


If the pedigree-hunter is wise, he will have provided himself with
_Ancestral Tablets_, by Whitmore, as has been previously suggested.
They simplify matters greatly.

But he may not have done this, or he may have occasion to jot down
his forbears on paper either for his own recollection or for the
information of others. Of course, this must often be done, and the
following is a simple method to adopt.

We will suppose his “tree” begins with a certain John Browne.

He might thus note particulars, leaving blanks in the way indicated
where information is not forthcoming.

The mark [Illustration: stick figure with crossed arms] signifies that
all the children are not noted in his pedigree.

Sometimes an actual _tree_ is drawn, with various branches emanating
from a parent stem. This is an interesting method, the effect being
clear, but the amateur might find its execution somewhat difficult.


                           John Browne,  =  Jane Roberts,
                           of Co. Devon, |  b. --, d. --
                           b. --, d. --  |
              +----------+---------------+------+
              |          |                      |
           George     Michael  =  Ellen,       John,
           of Devon,  b. 1710, |  dau. of      b. 1713,
           b. 1708    d. --    |  George Shaw  d. 1713
                               |
         +--------------+------+
         |              |
       Peter   = --?  John     = --?
       b. --,  |      of York  |
       d. 1750 |               |
               |               |
   +-----------+               +---------------+
   |                           |               |
 Mary = Capt. Duncan, R.N., Henry    = --?  Robert,    = Alice, daughter
      | of Somerset         of Devon |     b. --, d.-- |  of John Jones
      =                              |                 |
     /|\                             |     +-----------+----------+
                                     |     |           |          |
     +----------+-------+------------+  James = Mary  John      Thomas
     |          |       |                Scott        died       died
 Elizabeth    John    Mary                 |      in infancy  in infancy
                                           |
                       +--------------+----+------+
                       |              |           |
                     Ethel,         George,     John = Lucy Anna,
                     m. John Scott  b. 1885,    b.     dau. of Rev.
                                    d. 1904     1886   J. S. Lick, 1908

Again, the genealogist may have to write more in narrative form
particulars connected with his family tree. The following is an
illustration of how this may be done--

“John Browne was succeeded by his brother, James Browne, who was born
1st April 1661, married Sarah, daughter of Michael Jones of Wiltshire,
and died in 1735, leaving issue--

  1. John, of whom presently.
  2. George, alive in 1771.
  3. Nicholas, b. 1710, d. --(?).
  4. Bernard, married Mary Green, 1754.

  1. Ellen, married --(?) Smith.
  2. Elizabeth, b. 1705, married John Jones.
  3. Abigail, married Peter Smith.
  4. Mary, died in infancy.
  5. Hannah.
  6. Rose, died in infancy.

“The eldest son, John Browne, b. 1698, succeeded his father, James,
in 1735. He married, 1724, Isabella, daughter of Michael Spencer of
Devonshire, and had four sons and three daughters.”




CHAPTER VI

ADDITIONAL NOTES ON PEDIGREE-HUNTING IN LONDON


While the greater part of what has already been written applies to
the pedigree-hunter in London as well as elsewhere, he has naturally,
as being located in the British metropolis, certain advantages which
cannot be enjoyed in other localities.

_The Record Office._--Though the Irish Record Office is invaluable
to searchers in Ireland, the Record Office _par excellence_--that in
London--is, of course, best adapted to English research, and has the
custody of national documents of greater historical and antiquarian
interest.

It is free to searchers. The pedigree-hunter, on his first visit
there, will be pointed out two large Search Rooms, and will note with
satisfaction their comfortable appearance--also the walls lined with
bookshelves, all filled with indexes of various kinds.

By the help of some of these indexes he will probably discover
particulars as to the title and date of the document he wishes to
consult. If not, an application to one of the courteous officials in
charge will most likely throw all necessary light on the subject.
A docket will be given him to fill up containing the necessary
particulars, and the document itself will follow with very little delay.

The pedigree-hunter may be asked if he has a ticket entitling him to
search here. Such tickets have been rather lately introduced by the
Record Office authorities; before that, no restriction was placed on
a searcher, and this is almost a nominal one; he has merely to be
recommended by a householder.

If the searcher cannot produce the necessary ticket, he will be given
a form to fill up and get signed by the householder, which he will be
requested to send to the Record Office before his next visit.

On receipt of this form, duly signed, a ticket entitling him to make
researches there will be posted to him.

At the Record Office the pedigree-hunter will, of course, find most of
the various classes of miscellaneous MSS. which have been mentioned
as likely to be of greatest service to him. There, also, he might
consult hundreds of indexes which would not help his particular object
in the least, and he may indeed be bewildered by the vast stores of
antiquarian information so lavishly offered to him.

A most useful book, which he will find on the shelves, is
Scargill-Bird’s _Guide to the Record Office_. It enumerates the various
_classes_ of documents stored there.

But the searcher may still be in doubt as to his individual case. If
so, and he, having looked up the various MSS. recommended, thinks
additional information might be forthcoming, he should then consult one
of the Record Office officials, stating the exact point on which he is
anxious to obtain information; probably the required document will be
in his hands a few minutes later.

The following classes of documents will be found the most generally
useful to the genealogical searcher in the Record Office: The State
Papers, Chancery and Exchequer Proceedings, The Parliamentary Surveys,
Feet of Fines, Royalist Composition Papers, Patent and Close Rolls.

_The Heralds’ College._--The fees payable at the Heralds’ College
are not exorbitant, and, of course, stores of armorial and
other genealogical information are preserved there. The London
pedigree-hunter has the advantage here also; for though he cannot,
as in the Record Office, search himself through all the requisite
documents, yet if he applies in person at the Heralds’ College (this is
called a personal search), the fee for information on a required point
will be five shillings; if the inquiry is made by correspondence, ten
shillings and sixpence.

The treasures of the Heralds’ Office are divided broadly into Records
and Collections. A general Record search costs two guineas, and a
search through Records and Collections five guineas.

_Somerset House._--In this vast storehouse of documents the two classes
which will most appeal to the genealogist are the collection of Wills
and the general Registers.

Wills earlier than 1858 are found in the local Diocesan Registries,
and are in a variety of places scattered over England. Formerly, if
a person owned property in more than one diocese, his will would be
proved in the Archbishop’s Court. So wills were proved in Canterbury
Prerogative Court for all parts of England, and not merely locally.
_All these Canterbury Prerogative wills are at Somerset House._ Some
northern wills are at York for the same reason. But all wills since
1858 are deposited at Somerset House.

In the Registrar-General’s office there, registers have been kept
regularly since 1837. The fees are not high. If, for instance, the
pedigree-hunter wants to ascertain the date of a certain birth, the
search through five years for one name costs five shillings.

To look up wills costs one shilling each, unless the searcher has a
free literary docket; particulars as to these literary permits will be
found in a later chapter.

_The Middlesex Registry._--This Registry, situated in St. James’s
Street, contains all documents (since 1708) which affect land in
Middlesex.

LIBRARIES.--_The British Museum._--The London genealogist is also
especially fortunate with regard to libraries. Foremost of all comes,
of course, that at the British Museum. There not only is access to the
Great Reading Room free by ticket (on the recommendation of a London
householder), but the Newspaper Room and MSS. Department are also free,
and both are very valuable to the genealogist. The latter is especially
so, as it contains a store of manuscripts and Pedigrees, Herald’s
Visitations, and numberless miscellaneous documents.

_Lambeth Library._--This is situated in Lambeth Palace, and deserves
to be more frequently visited by the genealogical student than it
is at present, for it contains many ancient pedigrees and important
manuscripts. Its contents are all old, and are divided into records and
printed books. There are seven distinct series of manuscripts, bound
in volumes--also very good indexes.

The pedigree-hunter will have the required volumes brought to him in
the Great Hall erected by Juxon, now used as a Reading or Search Room.

_Heralds Office Library._--There is a library of genealogical and
armorial works and books bearing on such subjects at the Herald’s
Office, Queen Victoria Street.

_The Guildhall Library._--Another London Library, where printed books
on genealogy can be had in abundance, is that of the Guildhall, which
ranks in this way only second to the British Museum Library.




CHAPTER VII

THE PEDIGREE-HUNTER IN IRELAND


As has previously been intimated, the pedigree-hunter, if looking up an
Irish family, can discover almost everything he wants (if discoverable
at all) in Dublin.

So, even if living in some country district in Ireland, all he requires
is to locate himself for some time in the Irish metropolis.

There he will find, in the Dublin Record Office, the _Wills and
Administrations_ which he needs, both Prerogative and Diocesan.

There he can revel in the _Chancery_ and _Exchequer Bills_ and
_Answers_ which, apart from the direct object of his search, very often
supply most interesting and even amusing information.

_Cause Papers_, another variation of legal documents, are to be found
there; also _Marriage Licence Bonds_ for the whole of Ireland, and,
indeed, nearly all the more important documents of the various kinds
enumerated in earlier chapters.

Besides these, the Dublin Record Office holds the greater number of
Irish _Parochial Registers_, either in the original or as copies, both
equally valuable to the searcher. This is a great advantage to him, as
he may find what he wants in the registers of a country parish while
searching in Dublin.

But many parishes still keep their registers in their own possession,
and have not forwarded any “parochial returns” to the Dublin Record
Office.

“Inquisitions post-mortem” and “ad quod damnum” of early dates can be
consulted there; they are written in Latin, and a novice would not
find them at all easy to decipher. The majority of them, however, have
been printed in ponderous old volumes, which can be studied by all
interested.

The pedigree-hunter should go through as many indexes of documents as
he can during his visits to this Record Office on the chance of coming
across something new and valuable.

There are bookcases lined with volumes of indexes round the walls
of the Search Room, and others, such as those required for Chancery
and Exchequer Bills--known as “Bill Books”--will be given to him on
application.

Though so much is discoverable at the Record Office, the Dublin
searcher must not confine his attention to it, as there are other
treasure-houses in that metropolis also.

He should certainly make his way to the Registry of Deeds in King’s
Inn, for there he will be sure to have valuable finds, and he can
search in the office all day long on payment of two shillings and
sixpence.

Indeed, the pedigree-hunter will be more than surprised at the number
of deeds under each name which the copious indexes display, and as a
separate index is issued (for each letter of the alphabet) for every
few years, a long time might be profitably spent in the Search Room of
the Registry of Deeds, and each successive visit there be increasingly
beneficial.

Therefore the searcher in Ireland must not forget to devote his
attention to the Registry of Deeds, King’s Inn, Dublin.

Nor should he fail to visit Trinity College, where he can peruse
_Matriculation Entries_, which supply the father’s name and other
particulars, to his heart’s content. No fees are charged for such
investigations.

And if the inquiries he wishes to make relate to early times, he may
find there also _pedigrees_ of value, for fairly early pedigrees of
Anglo-Irish families, as well as other similar documents of interest
and importance, are preserved in T. C. D.

At the Castle, Dublin, he can visit the _College of Arms_, Ulster’s
Office, which, of course contains a vast store of genealogical and
armorial information.

The Betham MSS. are among the most important of such documents stored
there.

But pedigree-hunters are not admitted far into these hallowed
precincts; indeed, they are seldom now allowed to make personal
searches, as officials undertake the desired investigations for stated
fees.

The searcher may derive considerable benefit from visits to the
principal Dublin libraries.

The _National Library_ contains the published works already
recommended, and has a most valuable stock of newspapers, some of which
date from far back in the eighteenth century. Besides this, the indexes
will show several out-of-print pamphlets and other papers of interest
to the genealogist.

_Trinity College Library_ is of world-wide renown, being one of the
five British libraries to which a copy of every published book must be
sent. It possesses certain valuable illuminated MS. treasures relating
to early Irish history and ancient Irish families. Some noticeable
Irish wills are also here deposited. The library, as such, is not open
to the public; special permission _may_, however, be given to read
there, if approved by the authorities.

At _Christ Church Cathedral_ a certain number of ancient deeds and
other documents have been preserved; particulars as to these can be
found in the _Reports_ of the Deputy-Keeper.

These are the principal places in the Irish metropolis where
genealogical information can be obtained, and some of them may be found
by the searcher to be genuine treasure-houses. This is especially the
case with the Irish Record Office, which, as we have seen, preserves
most valuable documents of all descriptions.

But if any desirable _Parochial Registers_ are not procurable there,
application should be made to the rectors of the parishes in question.

The publications of the _Parish Register Society of Dublin_ might
be consulted. The _Irish Association for the Preservation of the
Memorials of the Dead_ has issued certain volumes which are most
valuable, as they record and reproduce the inscriptions on many old
Irish tombstones. The _Journal of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of
Ireland_, and the _Journal of the Cork Historical and Archaeological
Society_, should also prove valuable to the searcher in Ireland.




CHAPTER VIII

THE PEDIGREE-HUNTER IN SCOTLAND AND THE PROVINCES


The genealogist in Scotland will naturally direct his steps to
Edinburgh, where his happy hunting-ground will be the Old Register
House.

This, however, is not thrown open to all comers in the hospitable
manner experienced at the London Record Office, and application must
be made by the genealogist for a special permit allowing him to make
investigations in the Historical Search Department.

The General Register House consists of three buildings, and is divided
into the Old Register House and the New Register House.

Amongst the important records kept there, the following may be
especially mentioned:--

_Crown Writs._--These are similar to English Letters-Patent. An earlier
series of these are known as Privy Seals, and date from 1498.

_The Register of the Great Seal_, containing various records from 1315.

_Exchequer Records_, dating from 1474, deal with matters relating
to revenue, rentals of townlands, etc., and may disclose points of
interest to the pedigree-hunter.

_Privy Council Records._--These are of varied character and importance.
They consist of Acts, Warrants, State Papers, Royal Letters, etc.

Last, though possibly to the genealogist they may be the most important
of all, we must mention:--

_The Sasine Records._--By means of these the history of real property
in Scotland can be traced much more fully than is generally possible in
England or Ireland. The name “Sasine” is the Scottish equivalent of the
word “seizin”--the possession of land.

_The Sasine Writs_ commence at different dates for various districts
and for the several shires in Scotland. All such registers, however,
are now superseded by the General Register of Sasines, which commenced
in 1869.

_Wills_, which are such an essential item in English and Irish
pedigree-hunting, are not quite so important in connection with
Scottish families, for up to 1874 a Scotsman could not devise land, so
his will could only deal with personalty. Still, of course, wills must
be looked up and noted in Scotland as they would be elsewhere.

Neither are _Parish Registers_ so important a feature of genealogical
research in that country as in England. The reason of this is that
there was no early enactment there on the subject. So register-keeping
by the parochial authorities was, up to 1854, a purely voluntary
undertaking. Since this date a regular system of registration, like
that in vogue in England, has been carried out.

Scotland has, like its sister countries, its own _Office of Arms_. This
is known as the _Lyon’s Office_.

But, apart from the General Registry House, there are certain local
records in Scotland which might be consulted.

The principal of these are: _The Books of the Sheriffs’ Courts_, _The
Books of the Royal Burghs_, _Ancient Episcopal Records_.

There were no Herald’s Visitations for Scotland, but their Sasines
affect all the landed classes.

The records of the Scottish _Universities_ supply information which
may be very valuable to the genealogist, in much the same way as those
in England and Ireland. These Scottish Universities are St. Andrews,
Glasgow, Aberdeen, and Edinburgh.

_The Advocates’ Library_, Edinburgh, is a very celebrated one, and of
printed books, such as have been recommended, the genealogist should
find a plentiful supply in any large library in Edinburgh or Glasgow.

Perhaps our pedigree-hunter, when looking up a Scottish family, may
rejoice in the existence of the Clan system in Scotland.

Even if this is regarded as a mixed benefit, it has the advantage of
giving the genealogist a more limited nomenclature through which to
search.

WALES.--_Welsh Families._--If by any chance our pedigree-hunter is
looking up a family of purely Welsh origin, he may be somewhat puzzled
by the family nomenclature, which is almost entirely patronymic, and
until rather lately the baptismal name of the father often became the
son’s surname!

_Parish Registers_ exist in Wales just as in England and Ireland, but
very few of them have been printed.

There are also various _Episcopal Diocesan Registers_ to be consulted
there.

Welsh _Chancery Records_ were until lately kept distinct from the
various series in England.

Reference should be made to those of the _Deputy-Keeper’s Reports_
(these can be consulted in most good libraries) which concern Wales.
According to what district is required, they will give particulars
as to what documents should be searched and where to find them.
There are, for instance, Welsh Pedigrees and genealogical manuscripts
deposited in various libraries.

_The Provinces._--The pedigree-hunter who is located in any country
part of England will almost certainly have to pay a visit to the
metropolis, either in person or by proxy, to ensure a successful
search. Still, while he is at home, some most important records may be
close beside him.

As has already been mentioned, _Wills_, which are not stored at
Somerset House, are kept in numerous depositories all over the land,
principally in the Episcopal Courts.

The country searcher may find that his Diocesan Registry, which perhaps
is close at hand, is just the place where he hopes to discover the most
promising wills.

Then as to _Parochial Registers_, he may find he is in a better
position to come across those he wants (should they date before 1837)
than if he were in London.

_Register Bills_, transcripts of parochial registers, should be sent
annually to the Bishop’s Registries, and may be found there.

However, there is no law enforcing this, so the duty is regarded, more
or less, as a voluntary one.

Consequently the searcher will probably have to visit the various
parishes or write to the vicars, and much may be discovered in this way.

In 1538, a decree was issued by Henry VIII.’s minister, Cromwell,
enacting that parish registers should be regularly kept. This order, if
carried out as it was intended, would have filled with joy the heart of
many a genealogist; but, alas, in early days especially, the rule was
often more honoured in the breach than in the observance. Still, the
pedigree-hunter should discover much valuable information at the parish
registries.

But besides the Probate, Diocesan, and Parochial Registers, if his
object is to find out particulars about a country family, he might
consult _Municipal Documents_, _County Records_, and should refer
to the _Old Record Commission Reports_ of 1800 and 1837; these are
compiled from the returns made by custodians of records throughout the
country, and supply ample information in various miscellaneous matters.
They have been already mentioned.

_Marriage Licences_ are sometimes a fruitful field for discoveries. In
the country these should be obtainable at the Episcopal Registries.
If those required are not to be found there, they may probably be
discovered at the Archdeacon’s Courts.

Of course, the searcher in the counties cannot have access to such
libraries as those in London and Dublin, unless, indeed, he happens
to be near Oxford, where the _Bodleian Library_ is a storehouse of
antiquarian information.

_The University Library_, Cambridge, might also be of great value, but
it is not easy to get access within its precincts.

And, while in that neighbourhood, _Caius College Library_, Cambridge,
should not be overlooked, as it might supply some desirable information.

Sundry genealogical details might also be obtained from the _Officers
of the Clerks of the Peace_, for counties, and from the _Officers of
the Town Clerks_, for boroughs.




CHAPTER IX

THE WILL-SEARCHER IN ENGLAND


We have previously seen that wills in Scotland have not the same
evidential value as in other parts of Great Britain, that Irish wills
can be practically all found in Dublin, and that in London, Somerset
House is the depository where wills proved since 1858 have been kept,
as well as those proved in the Court of Canterbury, these latter being
not altogether restricted to testators who lived in that district. They
date from 1383.

There remain, however, the different wills proved in various parts of
the country; where exactly shall the searcher look for these?

The year 1858 was indeed an epoch-making year in this respect, for not
only was the enactment carried into force that future wills should be
deposited in Somerset House, but the old Diocesan Courts, where (as has
been previously stated) country wills were mainly kept, were superseded
by the District Registries. There nearly all the wills formerly in the
old Diocesan Courts are now preserved.

The following are the names of these, and practically all wills not
deposited in Somerset House, in Edinburgh, or in Dublin should be
procurable in one or other of these Registries:--

Blandford, Bangor, Bristol, Bury St. Edmunds, Canterbury, Carlisle,
Carmarthen, Chester, Chichester, Derby, Durham, Exeter, Gloucester,
Hereford, Ipswich, Lancaster, Lewes, Lichfield, Lincoln, Liverpool,
Llandaff, Manchester, Newcastle-on-Tyne, Northampton, Norwich,
Nottingham, Oxford, Peterborough, St. Asaph’s, Salisbury, Taunton,
Wakefield, Wells, Winchester, Worcester, York.

The last-named District Registry, that of York, is not exclusively
confined to wills of those who lived in the district; the others almost
universally are.

Each Registry, as a rule, comprises several of the suppressed Diocesan
and Minor Courts. They all date from early times, the latest being
those of Winchester and Wells, which contain no wills before 1660, and
the earliest that of Bury St. Edmunds, where the wills date from 1354.

When noting the contents of a will, the pedigree-hunter should put
down all particulars, even what at first sight might appear trivial,
as small items sometimes lead to great discoveries. The names of the
witnesses to a will, for instance, should never be omitted.

Of course, it is not necessary to copy a document in full, but its
contents should be noted somewhat in this way--

 Will of John Browne, of. Proved in. (Give names of Court and date.)

 _Legatees._--(Here note names of all legatees, their addresses,
 if given, and _especially_ note particulars of any relationships
 mentioned, all details of property devised, also any other points of
 importance, if such occur in the will.)

 _Signed._--(Signature and date to be given here.)

 _Witnesses._--(Names of witnesses here.)

If there is a codicil, the contents, date of signature, and names of
witnesses to _it_ should also be given.

The contents of all deeds, leases, and other documents should, as far
as this is practicable, be noted in a somewhat similar manner.




CHAPTER X

AN ADDITIONAL LIST OF PUBLICATIONS WHICH MAY BE USEFUL WHEN TRACING A
PEDIGREE


Chamberlain’s _Angliæ Notitia; or, The Present State of Great Britain_,
commenced in 1663, and was continued nearly every year until 1755. If
information is required between these dates as to the professional or
official classes, this will be found a valuable work to consult.

_The London Gazette_ supplies still more comprehensive records with
regard to the professions, learned and otherwise. Public appointments
are here notified, the conferment of honours, promotions in the Church,
Army, and Navy, etc. It commenced in 1665, and is now issued twice
weekly.

The records of local societies and local magazines may often profitably
be consulted.

Of the former the following are the most useful:--

The _Antiquarian Societies_ of Batley and Bradford (Yorkshire), also of
Beverley, Heckmondwicke, Lancashire and Cheshire, Newcastle-upon-Tyne,
Isle of Man.

The _Archæological Societies_ of Bristol and Gloucestershire,
Burton-on-Trent, Derbyshire, Durham, Essex, Kent, London and Middlesex,
Northamptonshire, St. Albans, Scarborough, Shropshire, Somerset,
Suffolk, Surrey, Sussex, Wilts, Worcester, and Yorkshire; the Cambrian
Archæological Society, the Somerset Record Society, and the Surtees’
Society, Durham.

The following local magazines may also be referred to:--

_The Western Antiquary._

_Notes and Queries_, respectively issued for the following districts:
Bedfordshire, Devon, Fenland, Gloucestershire, Northamptonshire,
Cheshire, and Manchester.

_Lancashire and Cheshire Antiquarian Notes._

_The Manx Notebook._

_The Palatine Notebook._

Where information is sought as to _Members of Parliament_, the _Blue
Book Returns_ should be consulted, and a valuable official work,
_Returns to Two Orders of the House of Commons_ (dated 4th May 1876 and
9th March 1877) _of the Names of every Member returned to Serve in each
Parliament from the Earliest Time to 1874_.

Cave’s _Parliamentary Register_ brings the list of members down to
1741; _The Chronological Register of Parliament from 1707 to 1807_, by
Robert Beatson, gives the required information between these dates.

Besides the MS. authorities with regard to the Army and Navy which
have already been enumerated, printed books on the subject, especially
if the searcher is not looking for very early information, should not
be ignored. Of course there are, as every one knows, official _Army_
and _Navy Lists_, and a good deal of genealogical information may be
derived from other books, as especially as regards the Navy.

Notable amongst these are:--

_A Naval Biographical Dictionary_, by W. R. O’Byrne.

_Biographia Navalis; or, Memoirs of the Officers of the Army from_
1600, by John Charnock, 4 vols., 1794.

_English Army-Lists_, etc., 1661-1714, by Charles Dalton, 6 vols.,
1892-1904.

_Lives of British Admirals_, by John Campbell, 4 vols., 1779; new
edition, 8 vols., 1812-17; abridged edition, 1847.

Of the two works of the _Old Record Commission_, dated 1801 and 1837
respectively, the latter will be found especially useful, as it
contains returns from many of the various depositories of documents in
Great Britain, notably The Tower, Houses of Parliament, etc.

Cotton’s _Fasti_ contains a store of information, biographical and
genealogical, about Church dignitaries, and certain searches among
parochial registers may be obviated by a perusal of Marshall’s _Parish
Registers_, for, as has previously been mentioned, a great many of such
are obtainable in print.

_The International Genealogical Directory_ should be consulted, as it
contains much which might be of great importance to the searcher. He
should also make himself acquainted with the very useful genealogical
handbooks published by Mr. C. A. Bernau of Walton-on-Thames.

The number of _County Histories_ increases rapidly, and the
pedigree-hunter should consult those which are connected with the
special districts in which he is interested.

From the _Victoria County Histories_ to those compiled by private
individuals, all may be of more or less importance to the genealogical
student.




CHAPTER XI

THE PAINS AND PLEASURES OF PEDIGREE-HUNTING


Is pedigree-hunting a dry and generally uninteresting matter, valuable
only for the information to be derived from it, or is it a source of
interest in itself, even if considered apart from its results?

To this, as to most questions, probably different answers could be
given. But the replies, if classified, might reveal the fact that,
though those who know little save in theory about genealogical work may
think it unattractive, others who have expended time and talents in the
pursuit almost universally agree that it is in itself--well, if not
fascinating enough to induce the investigator “to scorn delights and
live laborious days” (though this may be sometimes the case), still,
that it certainly approaches thereto.

Of course, a good deal depends upon the tastes of the searcher himself,
for if he takes up the work with energy he will certainly have to
count on many, at any rate, laborious _hours_; but the enjoyment
derivable from the pursuit should much more than compensate for these.

The great joy of the pedigree-hunter is the joy of discovery, and if he
sets about the work energetically he must discover something--yes, and
many things.

It is delightful to find a lost link in one’s own family history, and,
when doing this, the searcher will often unexpectedly come across a
store of information connected with other families in which he is
interested. Then there is the possibility of historical discoveries,
all perhaps springing from the fact of his electing to trace a certain
family tree, for historical characters were but men and women like
ourselves, and allied often to insignificant families.

I do not suggest that the pedigree-hunter can easily rival the recent
Shakespearean finds at the Record Office (the MSS. then brought to
light having lain there unnoticed during long centuries), for he
can only expect to get access to classified documents; yet by means
of these many interesting discoveries might be made, as well as the
definite family information which he requires be obtained.

But sometimes the discovery of a single missing link may elude the
searcher for long--if not for ever!--for ancestors have the knack
of being exasperatingly obstinate when they determine not to reveal
themselves to their descendants. Yet patience and perseverance should
in the end out-master this resolution, and during the search, though
some very dry reading may have to be undertaken and persisted in, a
great deal of interest must also necessarily crop up; for records are
by no means altogether dry reading, as the student of affidavits in the
Chancery and Exchequer Courts can testify.

Besides having to wade through many technical and uninviting-looking
documents, the pedigree-hunter may find considerable difficulty in
_deciphering_ some of these MSS.

The novice, however, need not at the outset trouble himself very much
about this (unless he has from the beginning of his search to refer to
very ancient documents), because he can prosecute the greater part of
his work by means of authorised copies of the required documents, which
are usually handed to him in place of the original MSS. But where the
latter must be consulted and presents certain difficulties, officials
in charge usually show themselves both able and willing to help in the
matter.

Still, a facility in deciphering old MSS. is a valuable asset to the
pedigree-hunter, and may at times be almost a necessity.

Where such is the case, he cannot do better than consult a work
entitled _How to Decipher and Study Old Documents_,[2] by E. E. Thoyts
(Mrs. John Hauteville Cope), which will explain and smooth away his
difficulties in a wonderful manner. It has been styled _A Key to the
Family Deed-Chest_, and is so in truth.

These are some of the difficulties which arise in genealogical
searches, but are far counterbalanced by the results achieved.
Enthusiasm and patience are certainly necessary qualifications of the
successful pedigree-hunter, and endowed with these virtues he has not
much to fear, for the driest details seem replete with interest when
regarded in the light of dawning discoveries.

Nor can a pedigree-hunter work at genealogy alone; many fascinating
subjects, such as biography, history, and heraldry, must almost
necessarily more or less follow in its train, opening up a vista of
further interest and a field for new discoveries.


FOOTNOTES:

[2] Published by Elliot Stock, Paternoster Row, E. C.




CHAPTER XII

HOW TO SAVE EXPENSE IN PEDIGREE-HUNTING


There is no doubt that if any one wishes to expend a small fortune in
record-searching he may find opportunity of doing so; if, on the other
hand, even shillings are an object to him, he can carry on his work for
very little expense.

The English Record Office, with its vast stores of information, is free
to all searchers; so are the British Museum Reading and MSS. Rooms;
also the other great London libraries.

At Somerset House, where so many of the wills are stored, the fees are
one shilling for each document searched. An ardent genealogist might
find that this ran away with a good deal of money; but if his object is
purely literary, as is so often the case with pedigree-hunters, then a
docket can be obtained entitling him to search gratuitously in Somerset
House at stated days and hours, as may be arranged.

The Dublin Record Office is not free to the public, the class of
documents it contains differing from those in the London Office. Irish
wills, as we have seen, are stored there, and the fee for the perusal
of any document is one shilling.

Here again, however, “the literary permit” can be obtained; it is
usually issued for a month at a time, and is renewable. But whether
there or in England, no free search is permitted, unless the required
documents are nearly a century old, and in every instance the search
must be undertaken with a purely _literary_ object in view. If the
pedigree-hunter wishes to make good his claim to property, or has
any other legal project in his mind--well, he must pay for his
investigations.

For the Heralds’ Office, London, and the College of Arms, Dublin, no
literary dockets are issued; neither is the Registry House, Edinburgh,
free to all comers. Half a crown a day is charged at the Registry
of Deeds, Dublin, but this half-crown can cover a great amount of
searching.

Where parochial registries have to be consulted at the parishes
themselves, fixed moderate fees are charged. In some cases these
charges may be modified, or even abolished altogether, in favour of
a literary investigator; but this is a special favour, granted for
special reasons by the rector or curate in charge.

Literary free permits are, however, as we have seen, issued in
connection with most of the great offices where genealogical
information can be gleaned, and by the help of these far the greater
part of the pedigree-hunter’s work can be carried on almost free of
expense.

In certain other instances, where official fees are charged, literary
searchers are often most leniently considered, for in genealogical
matters a good deal depends on the pedigree-hunter himself, and a
system of red tapeism is not everywhere carried out.

For university and school details and entries the registers can often
be consulted absolutely free of cost, so the searcher with the narrow
purse has really little to fear financially when embarking on the
delightful task of pedigree-hunting.




CHAPTER XIII

LAST WORDS


At the beginning of this work it was laid down as a golden rule that
pedigree-hunters should always, where practicable, _verify their
information_.

This is so important that it may be well to reiterate it at the close.
It is often easy to get information second-hand; but to make it his own
the searcher may have to exercise a good deal of patience and research,
and he must sometimes be prepared for disappointment.

Still, the result will more than repay him, for thus only can his work
be sound and satisfactory, and he has a wide field in which to search
for the verification of traditional details.

Most of the probably most helpful MSS. and publications have been
mentioned in this little book; but if the pedigree-hunter is roaming
among the documents in the Record Office or the British Museum, or
among the contents of a great library, let him look through the
various indexes and try to find out something new for himself. There
is a joy in discovery, even if it is only that of an unknown document,
and it is impossible to enumerate every work which might help all
cases, while new ones, of course, are constantly being added.

If the genealogist is not a student of Heraldry, he will find it both
interesting and probably advantageous to form some slight acquaintance
with this fascinating subject. The question of the Arms of a Family are
of more importance than its Crest and Motto, and through the knowledge
of what arms are, and have been, borne by it, the identification of
some of its members may be established.

But Heraldry is a wide subject, and many use arms and crests to which
they are quite unable to prove their right.

On the other hand, many who now occupy a humble station are lineal
descendants in the male line of ancient and historic families.

And, perhaps, our pedigree-hunter may be anxious to prove himself to be
of noble or even royal descent.

Some years ago an advertiser offered, for a certain fee, to prove to
his clients that they were descended from kings of England. Naturally
_Truth_ the argus-eyed, spied this advertisement, and denounced the
seeming imposture. But when matters were explained to him, _Truth’s_
opinion somewhat altered.

The point in question is an interesting one. Every one, we may say, has
had two parents, four grandparents, eight great-grandparents, and so on
_ad infinitum_.

If the reader calculates the number of generations required to take
him back to the Norman Conquest, allowing thirty years for each (there
would be approximately twenty-eight), this will give him over a hundred
million ancestors alive in 1066!

This number will in reality be much lessened by the fact of
inter-marriages and relationships (so that the same individuals may
be ancestors on both the paternal and maternal sides), also by other
causes. But the fact remains that there was only a population of a few
millions in Great Britain at the time of the Norman Conquest, and our
ancestors at that date apparently consisted of a much greater number,
so that the probabilities are that almost every Englishman of either
Saxon or Norman ancestry must have been descended from every one living
in England at the time of the Norman Conquest, including the Conqueror
himself.

Of course, this works out also in another way, and makes us all
descended from the serfs as well as from the lords of the soil. Though
the matter may not be capable of demonstration, it is an interesting
point to consider.

A genealogist, however, is not satisfied with a pedigree which cannot
be proved, and if our pedigree-hunter thinks, either from the high
qualities with which he is endowed, or from the knowledge of noble
ancestors having adorned his family tree, that kings must have been
undoubtedly numbered among _his_ forbears--well, of course, he must
make good his claim, perhaps even to royal descent in the male line.

This probably will not be a matter which can be accomplished, but
he may possibly be able to prove that he is descended from English
kings--though not in the direct male line--provided that some of his
ancestors were of high social position.

As a matter of fact, the majority of our greater and lesser nobility
are of royal descent, and if our pedigree-hunter’s ancestors
were allied to such families, the descent in his case should be
comparatively easy to prove.

To help towards this, he might consult Burke’s _Royal Descents_ and
Foster’s _Royal Lineages_; but if his family cannot claim the honour
of royal ancestry, the “kind hearts” which are “more than coronets”
may have been his proud heritage through a long line of forbears. And,
taking into consideration the millions of ancestors which each noble
lord has had, there cannot fail to have been some of low degree from
whom _he_ has been descended in bygone centuries.

Some families rise in the social scale, others descend, and the
genealogist may come across numerous instances of the vicissitudes of
families.

Heirs to the highest of what were regarded as extinct titles have been
found occupying the very lowest positions in the social scale. Who
knows whether some unexpected stroke of fortune may not come across
our genealogical searcher. In fact, there are few limits as to the
possibilities which may arise in pedigree-hunting.




INDEX

  Administration Bonds, 20

  Advocates’ Library, Edinburgh, 40, 41

  _Ancestor, The_, 18

  _Ancestral Tablets_, 8, 24

  _Angliæ Notitia_, 48

  _Annual Register_, 17

  Antiquaries, Society of, 16

  Army, The, 23, 48

  Assize Rolls, 20

  Attorneys, 22, 23


  Baronetage, 6

  Baronets, Official Roll of, 6

  Barristers, 22

  Betham MSS., 36

  Bodleian Library, 44

  British Archæological Association, 16

  ---- Museum Library, 31, 56

  Burke’s _Commoners_ and _Landed Gentry_, 7, 16

  ---- _Royal Descents_,    62


  Caius College Library, Cambridge, 44

  _Calendars of State Papers_, 14

  Camden Society, 16

  Cause Papers, 33

  Census Returns, 21

  Chancery Proceedings, 19, 29, 33, 34, 41, 54

  Christ Church Cathedral, Dublin, 37

  Christian Names, 12

  Church and Clergy, 48, 51

  Clan System, 41

  College of Arms, Dublin, 36, 57

  College of Arms, London, 29, 35, 57

  College of Physicians, Roll of, 22

  _Commoners_, Burke’s, 7, 16

  County Histories, 51

  ---- Records, 43

  Courts, Canterbury, Prerogative, 9, 30

  Courts, Diocesan and Prerogative, 9, 11

  Courts, Peculiar, 9

  Cromwell’s Decree, 43

  Crown Writs, 38


  Decipher Old Documents, How to, 55

  Deciphering Old Documents, 54, 55

  Deeds, 20, 35

  Dental Practitioners, 22

  Deputy Keeper’s Reports, 14, 37, 41

  Derivation of Word Pedigree, 1

  Diocesan Registers, 22, 41, 42, 43, 45

  Directories, 17

  District Registries, 45, 46

  Dublin, College of Arms, 36

  ---- Irish Record Office, 9, 19, 33, 34, 57

  ---- Registry of Deeds, 35, 57

  ---- Trinity College, 35

  ---- ---- Library, 36


  Edinburgh, Advocates’ Library, 40

  ---- Old Register House, 38, 39

  Exchequer Records, 19, 29, 33, 34, 39, 54


  Family Histories, 6, 7, 13

  ---- Trees, 24, 25, 26

  Feet of Fines, 29

  Foster’s _Collectanea_, 15

  Freemen, 22


  Genealogical Handbooks, 51

  _Genealogist, The_, 18

  _Genealogist’s Guide_, 14

  Genealogy, Usefulness of, 1, 2

  ---- Golden Rule in, 5, 7

  _Gentleman’s Magazine_, 18

  _Gentry, Landed_, 7, 16

  _Guide to the Record Office_, 29

  Guildhall Library, 32


  Harleian Society Publications, 16

  Hearth Money Rolls, 21

  Heraldic Records, 21

  Heraldry, 60

  Heralds’ College, 29, 57

  ---- Office Library, 32

  ---- _Visitation_, 15

  _Hibernian Magazine_, 18

  Historical Manuscript Commission, 14

  ---- Register, 17

  Huguenot Society, 17


  Index Society, 16

  Indexes, 6, 10

  Information should be Verified, 5, 6

  Inquisitions, 34

  Institution Books, 22

  _International Genealogical Directory_, 51

  _Irish Pedigree_, O’Hart’s, 16

  ---- Society for the Preservation of the Memorials of the Dead, 37


  Lancashire and Cheshire Records, 15, 49

  _Landed Gentry_, 7, 16

  Libraries--
    Advocates’ Library, Edinburgh, 40, 41
    British Museum, 31
    Bodleian, 44
    Caius College, Cambridge, 44
    Guildhall, 32
    Heralds’ Office, 32
    Lambeth, 31
    National Library, Dublin, 36
    Trinity College, 36
    University Library, Cambridge, 44

  Literary Permits, 57, 58

  Local Magazines, 48, 49

  ---- Societies, 48, 49

  _London Gazette_, 48

  ---- _Magazine_, 18

  Lyon’s Office, 40


  Magazines, 17, 18

  Marriage Licence Bonds, 20, 33

  ---- Licences, 20, 43

  Memorials of the Dead, 37

  Middlesex Registry, 31

  _Miscellanea Genealogica_, 16

  Monastic Registers, 21, 22

  Municipal Bodies, 22

  ---- Documents, 43

  Muster Rolls, 23


  National Library, Dublin, 36

  Navy, The, 23, 50

  ---- Lists, 23, 50

  Newspapers, 17, 36

  _Notes and Queries_, 18


  Office of Arms, Dublin, 29

  ---- London, 36

  ---- Scotland, 39, 57

  Officers of Clerks of the Peace, 44

  ---- of Town Clerks, 44

  O’Hart’s _Irish Pedigrees_, 16

  Old Register House, Edinburgh, 38, 57


  Pale, English, 11

  Parish Registers, 4, 5, 37, 41, 42, 57

  Parliament, 49

  Parliamentary Register, 50

  ---- Surveys, 29

  Peerages, 6, 13, 16

  Pipe Roll Publications, 17

  Pre’s _Occurrences_, 16

  Privy Council Records, 39

  Provinces, The, 42


  Record Office, 9, 19, 23, 27, 28, 29, 53, 56

  ---- Office, Irish, 9, 19, 33, 34

  ---- Society, 16

  Records, Lancashire and Cheshire, 15, 49

  _Records, Privy Council_, 39

  _Records of Sasine_, 39

  Register Bills, 42

  _Register of the Great Seal_, 38

  Registrar-General’s Office, 30

  Registry of Deeds, Dublin, 35, 57

  Reports, Deputy Keeper, 14, 37, 41

  Rolls, Patent and Close, 29

  Royal Archæological Institute, 16

  ---- Descents and Lineages, 62

  Royalist Composition Papers, 29


  Sasine Records, 39, 40

  Schools, 22

  Scottish Genealogy, 38, 39, 40, 41

  ---- Local Records, 40

  ---- Universities, 40

  Sim’s Index to Pedigrees, 15, 23

  Somerset House, 9, 10, 30, 46

  _State Papers_, 29

  Statute 4, Edward IV., 11

  Surgeons, Royal College of, 22

  Surnames, 4, 5, 11


  Tombstones, 4, 37

  Trinity College, Dublin, 35

  _Truth_, 60, 61


  Universities, 23, 40, 58

  University College Library, 44


  Verify Information, 5, 6, 59

  Victoria County Histories, 51


  Wales, 41, 42

  Walford’s _County Families_, 16

  Wills, 8, 30, 31, 33, 42, 45, 47, 57


_Printed by_ MORRISON & GIBB LIMITED, _Edinburgh_

[Illustration: Publisher mark]



Transcriber’s Notes

Page 3: “To do this the more efficiently” changed to “To do this more
efficiently”

Page 12: “on the right tack” changed to “on the right track”

Page 16: “Royal Archælogical Institute” changed to “Royal Archæological
Institute”

Page 31: “in a later chaptor” changed to “in a later chapter”

Page 58: “seachers are often” changed to “searchers are often”

In the Index, “_Anglæ Notitia_” changed to “_Angliæ Notitia_”.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO TRACE A PEDIGREE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
